Variables
Variables are named places to temporarily store data.
We can set (or “declare”) a variable,
which assigns a value to it, or read a
variable,
which will “expand” or “resolve” it to
its stored value.
We can declare variable values in a
number of ways.
The easiest method is to set the value
directly
with a simple name=value declaration.
Notice that there are no spaces before or
after the “=” sign.
Declaring a variable is pointless unless
we can reference it.
To do this, we precede the variable with
the the dollar sign character.
Whenever Bash encounters this syntax
in a command,
it replaces the variable name with its
value before execution.
Variable names may be uppercase,
lowercase, or a mixture of both.
However, Bash is case-sensitive so we
must be consistent when declaring
and expanding variables.
In addition, it’s good practice to use
descriptive variable names
which make our scripts much easier to
read and maintain.
Be advised that Bash interprets certain
characters in specific ways.
For example, this declaration
demonstrates an improper
multi-value variable declaration.
This was not necessarily what we expected.
To fix this, we can use either single or
double quotes to enclose our text.
However, Bash treats single and double
quotes differently.
When encountering single quotes,
Bash interprets every enclosed character
literally.
When enclosed in double quotes,
all characters are viewed literally
except the dollar sign, backtick,
and backslash, meaning variables will be
expanded in an initial substitution pass
on the enclosed text.
A few simple examples will help clarify
this.
First, we’ll declare and expand a
variable using single quotes.
In this example, the
single-quote-enclosed declaration
of greeting preserved the exact value
of our text
and did not interpret the space as a
command delimiter.
Now let’s declare a variable with
double quotes.
In the double-quote-enclosed declaration
of greeting2,
Bash expanded the greeting variable to
its value of “Hello World”,
honoring the special meaning of the
dollar sign character.
We can also set the value of the variable
to the result of a command or program.
This is known as command substitution,
which allows us to take the output of a
command or program (what would normally
be printed to the screen)
and have it saved as the value of a
variable.
To do this, place the variable name in
parentheses,
preceded by a dollar sign character.
Here, we are assigning the output of the
whoami command to the user variable.
Now let’s try displaying the value.
An alternative syntax for command
substitution is to use the backtick,
or grave, character.
The backtick method is older and
typically discouraged
as there are differences in how the two
methods of command substitution behave.
It’s also important to note that command
substitution happens in a subshell
and changes to variables in the subshell
will not alter variables from the master
process.
Let’s demonstrate this in the following
example:
In this exmaple, note that we changed the
shebang, adding in the -x flag.
This instructs Bash to print additional
debug output,
so we can more easily see the commands
that are executed and their results.
As we view this output, notice that
commands preceded with a single plus sign
were executed in the current shell
and commands preceded with a double plus
sign were executed in a subshell.
This allows us to clearly see that the
second declarations of var1 and var2
happened inside a subshell and did not
change the values in the current shell
as the initial declarations did.